First, here is a draft or sketch of a research paper's abstract:

We have discovered a new programming language known as the Transforming Executable Alphabet (TEA) language, which one could describe formally as general-purpose sequence-tranformer-chaining paradigm text-processing oriented programming language. Work on TEA begun around 2021 as part of a basic text-processing language being protyped as part of an Android mobile app known as TTTT (TEA Text-Transformer Terminal), but has since evolved beyond that initial idea into a modern, industry-ready, rigorously tested and cross-platform language currently usable via web, on mobile and in desktop and server environments. TEA is based on the idea of an instruction set whose core is just the 26 letters of the Latin Alphabet, and which we can qualify or decorate using a specific set of symbols known as command qualifiers, ".", "!", "*" and "@", so as to specify "qualified commands". In total, TEA's global maximum instruction set or commands can be no more than 624, and for all TEA instructions, the "key word" or rather "key letter", a to z or A to Z, whether qualified or not, is typically suffixed with a single colon, ":", and then none, one or more instruction parameters can follow thereafter, as TEA strings, and which, when the parameters are multiple, they are likewise delimited by a single ":", and then a TEA instruction line can either be followed by another TEA instruction, these being delimited by either one or more new lines, or when on the same line, by a single vertical bar "|". Also, a TEA program or instruction line might contain a TEA comment, which typically starts with a single hash symbol, "#" and so that the comment then continues until the end of the line, but also, any line in a TEA program that  isn't a valid TEA instruction line can be considered opaque to the TEA processor, and thus can likewise be treated as a comment. Thus, TEA programs can be expressed in three forms; sanitized form - in which case each TEA instruction sits on a single line on its own and with no comments allowed; or minified form - in which case multiple TEA instructions sit on a single line and are delimited by "|", or mixed form - in which case the TEA program can contain not only comments, but also valid TEA source code in either sanitized or minified form. The simplest common TEA program is the TEA hello world program, and is just "i!:Hello World". Currently, TEA has been used to prototype no less than 40 non-trivial "standard" generic, example programs, each of which, thanks to the way TEA code can be stored, can fit within a single string, and which programs span domains such as advanced mathematics calculators, statistical analysis, data engineering, human support chatbots, edutainment games, digital art generators, information security tool such as secure password generators, encryption and decryption tools, communication utilities such as an email client, programming utilities such as static code analysis, tools for esoteric science explorations and even a new operating system known as the "TEA OS". TEA continues to evolve, is still largely a less known programming language, but has been extensively documented, applied and continues to be promoted and polished by its inventor, Joseph Willrich Lutalo, currently a holder of a Master of Science degree in Software Engineering from Makerere University, and who is the founder and principal investigator at his Nuchwezi Research laboratory. As of this moment, TEA has been extensively written about in a book known as the "TEA TAZ" which is the official programming and language design manual for the language, but also, TEA has been illustratively  applied in other recent books by its inventor such as the upcoming treatise "Applying Transformatics in Genetics", and a 2025 treatise on computational mysticism known as "Novus Modernus Grimoire Lumtauto" which introduced 5 magical languages originally developed and explored at Nuchwezi Esoteric School. Where and how this language shall be applied in the future remains a daunting question given the language has only been recently brought to the level of an industry-ready language between 2024 and 2026, but given the interesting properties it has; such as being cross-platform, as performant and as ubiquitous as Python and JavaSCript which are currently used to implement its interpreters, and given its very readily memorizable instruction set and succinct, minimal programming signature, a very powerful state-of-the-art text-processing suite in-built in the language and features such as ability to interoperate with other languages, in-built database/persistent storage, a mature mathematics processing facility and inbuilt web-client programming primitives, it is very likely this language shall either be at par with or even surpass many contemporary and earlier programming language in many many domains both in academic, scientific and industrial programming.


And then, to help support of augment that material, I also have the following extra content about this language's story/history:


After almost 5 years of continuous hard and smart research work, TEA has finally reached its greatest maturity thus far! Here we present the Transforming Executable Alphabet v1.5.0;

https://tea.nuchwezi.com 
https://bit.ly/teamobile_apks
https://bit.ly/tazfile 

HIGHLIGHTS: Apart from the (now documented) fact that unlike older languages such as popular C with about a total of 250-300 functions in just its standard library + 32 reserved keywords, the TEA language, which doesn't need non-standard functions, comes in with just 26 key letters a to z or A to Z, and a global maximum of just 624 possible distinct commands via its 4 standard command qualifiers *, !, . and @.


TEA is a general-purpose language just like C, JavaScript, LISP or Python. However, only time will tell what it is to become most useful for. As of this moment, TEA has proven capable of the following feats;

1. The shortest programs per character such as for the Hello World standard.

2. A robust and exhaustive text processing suite more advanced than any modern language we currently know.

3. The easiest instruction set to master given each of the 26 letters of the alphabet stands for a clear and distinctive utility space in the TEA language.

4.  Very idiomatic instructions and signatures; such as just the following minimal, but powerful examples;

n:1000:10 ---(numbers)-> to generate random numbers between 10 and 1000

i!:{Name?}|i:|x:{Hi } --(interact)-> to prompt for and greet someone with their name

i!:{Long input}|g: --(glue)-> to eliminate white space from any input text.

a:{one two three go} --(anagrammatize)-> to shuffle a list of words

r.:{1/2*(1 + 5(2-1))} --(rewrite)-> to reduce expressions to their mathematical values

and that's just scratching the surface! TIP of an ICEBERG!

5. TEA comes with a very user friendly learning and working environment useable from anywhere; WEB, Mobile, Online and Offline capable.
And then...

6. TEA programs developed from anywhere can be used from anywhere TEA works; embedded on websites, used to build APIs, used to power servers, scripts, standalone mobile-web apps, or integrated into desktop apps. We have built several tools already to help demonstrate and prove such usecases.

7. TEA has/can be utilized for highly specialized practical domains such as;

+ portable database-powered programs or scripts (no need to install a custom database, small as it seems, TEA comes with a ready to use database inbuilt). 

+ ability to process TEA programs embedded inside of text files, documentation or even TEA code embedded in the source code of other programming languages!

+ very straightforward and robust web client programming (with support for GET & POST HTTP verbs, Custom Headers and a very powerful content writing and reading/processing facility)

+ arbitrary power for designing and testing information security programs such as ciphers, encryption and decryption, steganography, obfuscation, advanced mathematics codes and even such peculiar things as writing using space or invisible text messages!

+ designing and running lightweight interactive text-based games of many kinds, and which can be both engaging and with simple to complex reward logic.

And so much more...

8. TEA programs are generally small and lightweight enough that many difficult solutions can be written so as to fit within a single file and not just that, but that, especially when a TEA program is minified, it usually can readily fit inside just a few characters or just a single string!

9. TEA is still evolving, and the language standard has only been polished and completed mostly between 2024 and 2026, however, unlike many existing languages, it has amassed a good number of theory and practice papers and books, and might become one of the best documented programming languages given what the TEA TAZ is likely to become.


TEA is a general-purpose language just like C, JavaScript, LISP or Python. However, only time will tell what it is to become most useful for. As of this moment, TEA has proven capable of the following feats;

1. The shortest programs per character such as for the Hello World standard.

2. A robust and exhaustive text processing suite more advanced than any modern language we currently know.

3. The easiest instruction set to master given each of the 26 letters of the alphabet stands for a clear and distinctive utility space in the TEA language.

4.  Very idiomatic instructions and signatures; such as just the following minimal, but powerful examples;

n:1000:10 ---(numbers)-> to generate random numbers between 10 and 1000

i!:{Name?}|i:|x:{Hi } --(interact)-> to prompt for and greet someone with their name

i!:{Long input}|g: --(glue)-> to eliminate white space from any input text.

a:{one two three go} --(anagrammatize)-> to shuffle a list of words

r.:{1/2*(1 + 5(2-1))} --(rewrite)-> to reduce expressions to their mathematical values

and that's just scratching the surface! TIP of an ICEBERG!

5. TEA comes with a very user friendly learning and working environment useable from anywhere; WEB, Mobile, Online and Offline capable.
And then...

6. TEA programs developed from anywhere can be used from anywhere TEA works; embedded on websites, used to build APIs, used to power servers, scripts, standalone mobile-web apps, or integrated into desktop apps. We have built several tools already to help demonstrate and prove such usecases.

7. TEA has/can be utilized for highly specialized practical domains such as;

+ portable database-powered programs or scripts (no need to install a custom database, small as it seems, TEA comes with a ready to use database inbuilt). 

+ ability to process TEA programs embedded inside of text files, documentation or even TEA code embedded in the source code of other programming languages!

+ very straightforward and robust web client programming (with support for GET & POST HTTP verbs, Custom Headers and a very powerful content writing and reading/processing facility)

+ arbitrary power for designing and testing information security programs such as ciphers, encryption and decryption, steganography, obfuscation, advanced mathematics codes and even such peculiar things as writing using space or invisible text messages!

+ designing and running lightweight interactive text-based games of many kinds, and which can be both engaging and with simple to complex reward logic.

And so much more...

8. TEA programs are generally small and lightweight enough that many difficult solutions can be written so as to fit within a single file and not just that, but that, especially when a TEA program is minified, it usually can readily fit inside just a few characters or just a single string!

9. TEA is still evolving, and the language standard has only been polished and completed mostly between 2024 and 2026, however, unlike many existing languages, it has amassed a good number of theory and practice papers and books, and might become one of the best documented programming languages given what the TEA TAZ is likely to become.


10. TEA started out as a language utility meant to especially help UGANDANs working on their smartphones with low budget constraints for affording data and access to expensive, powerful computers to be able to write their own computer programs and readily solve problems for business, personal or communal problems. Especially while on the move, with low battery, no Internet and with little time to download installers, dependencies or 3rd party libraries. As of this writing, the language has already surpassed all its original intentions and scope, and is ready for industrial use by anyone around the world. It is Open Source and Free Software in the same spirit as the many underlying technologies that have made TEA possible.
Only a Fool (and perhaps not the Blind) can fail to see that TEA is a superpower waiting for one to learn to harness at almost zero cost!

#teaprogramming #background #story #milestones #cuttingedge #moderntech #madeinuganda


So, using those two bits of background information, Please generate for me a draft, well thought-out, impactful and appealing ACM SLE-quality paper (in latex), that can help introduce and present this new programming language to the world, and which paper I can hopefully submit to the ACM SLE journal. Give the paper a suitable, title based on the conventions of the ACM SLE journal, and also use that draft abstract above to craft not only a compelling abstract for this paper, but also much of the draft sections and conclusion which I might use to flesh-out this paper. I shall manually throw in more references as required, but you might also leverage the following TEA-related works by me:


An upcoming book (to be published by Taylor and Francis), that features using TEA to perform sequence analysis on genetic sequences (DNA and RNA) for example:

Joseph Willrich Lutalo. Applying TRANSFORMATICS in
GENETICS. I*POW, pages 1–206, Aug 2025.
https://www.academia.edu/143516392/. 


The GitHub home/repository for the TEA language project, where one shall find both the source code for the TEA intepreter implemented for the command-line using Python3, but also for the web using JavaScript. And where there are numerous TEA program sources for test-cases spanning the entire TEA instruction set A: to Z:, 40+ sample TEA programs, the latest TEA mobile app (for Android), and lots of documentation (man pages, READMEs and the TEA TAZ in both latex source and PDFs):

Joseph Willrich Lutalo. TEA GitHub Project — The Reference
Implementation of TEA (Transforming Executable Alphabet)
computer programming language.
https://github.com/mcnemesis/cli_tttt/, 2024. Accessed: 4th Aug,
2025.


Among examples of how to leverage TEA programming has been implemented a text-based adventure game reminiscent of classic command-line games such as "nethack", this one being called "Boobs 'N' Traps", and whose design/game state machine has been documented via:

Joseph Willrich Lutalo. GAME STATE MACHINE (BOOBS ‘N’
TRAPS) - a single-player text-adventure and strategy
role-playing game (RPG), Nov 2025. Figure and notes at
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.19479082.


There is a document that somewhat higlights, presents the earliest sketches of the ideas and thoughts that inspired the design and development of the first TEA language interpreter, and these notes are held in the following:

J. W. Lutalo. [notes][v1.1] Thoughts & Ideas Behind Design of TEA
language, 2024. Available at: https://www.academia.edu/122314564/
_notes_v1_1_Thoughts_and_Ideas_Behind_Design_of_TEA_language.


TEA as a language is founded on the idea of the sequence transformer chaining paradigm, and this idea has been well formalized and developed by the same person inventing TEA, but also the new subfield of mathematics being known as "Transformatics", which has been extensively discussed in his other upcoming book "Applying Transformatics in Genetics", but also which is succinctly introduced and the background theories and related mathematical research that led to the formalization of Transformatics being laid down in the following "mini-thesis":


Joseph Willrich Lutalo. TRANSFORMATICS 101 - explained.
Thesis, page 20, October 2025. https://www.academia.edu/144344109/.


While TEA was still getting formalized (circa 2024), the inventor undertook a task to introduce this language, but especially from the context of a text-processing language. And this work was well laid down in a paper about Software Language Engineering, which paper detailed and covered extensively, the intricacies of how one might go about implementing a text-processing domain specific language, with TEA being the example, and also that this paper presented a very compelling argument and theory that "all programming is text-processing" as part of the "Universal Programming Language Theory (UPLT)" also first laid down in this paper:


Joseph Willrich Lutalo. Software Language Engineering-Text
Processing Language Design, Implementation, Evaluation
Methods. Preprints, 2024. Available at:
https://www.preprints.org/frontend/manuscript/
3903e4cd075074a7005cb705a5ef26c5/download_pub.


The official programming manual and language design reference, but also the reference on TEA's instruction set covering what each of the 26 "command spaces" A: to Z: or a: to z: in TEA are for (their purpose), what their semantics and command syntax or signatures are, but also worked-out examples, and complete, ready-to-use sample applications under each chapter on each command space are laid down in this "living document" booklet at the core of contemporary TEA programming:


Joseph Willrich Lutalo. TEA TAZ - Transforming Executable
Alphabet A: to Z: COMMAND SPACE SPECIFICATION.
Academia.edu, 2024. Available at:
https://www.academia.edu/122871672/.


Then, concerning how TEA programs can be troubleshooted or debugged when being prototyped or being utilized by either a TEA programmer, tester or user, has been covered well in a paper on the subject:


Joseph Willrich Lutalo. Concerning Debugging in TEA and the TEA
Software Operating Environment. Computer Science and Mathematics:
Software, 2025. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.20944/preprints202502.1506.v2.


There was an earlier programming language, software-development project by the same author of the TEA language, that came earlier than the work on the TEA language, and this project, known as DNAP for "Dynamic Nuchwezi Architecture Platform", did help lay the ground for several ideas and theories in language research that have seen the development of TEA progress swiftly unto this moment, and this work is covered in the paper:

Joseph Willrich Lutalo, Odongo Steven Eyobu, and Benjamin Kanagwa.
DNAP: Dynamic Nuchwezi Architecture Platform-A New
Software Extension and Construction Technology. authorea, 2023.
Open Access via
https://www.techrxiv.org/doi/pdf/10.36227/techrxiv.13176365.v1.


Then, among 40+ TEA standard sample applications, is one whose focus is on human support via chatbots, and this work was first approached as an attempt at implementing a quasi-general artificial intelligence using the TEA language. This experiment has been well covered in the following publication:

Joseph Willrich Lutalo. Unraveling Mysteries of The ZHA q-AGI
Chatbot: an Interview by ICC, of Fut. Prof. JWL and M*A*P
Ade. Psymaz of Nuchwezi. Academia, 2025. Available at:
https://www.academia.edu/download/122791984/.

and 

Joseph Willrich Lutalo. Introducing ZHA, a Real q-AGI. Academia,
2025. Available at: https:
//www.academia.edu/129344807/Introducing_ZHA_a_real_q_AGI.

And then, there is a novel - a work in creative literary fiction, interestingly, also by the inventor of the TEA language, and which novel, though it focused on war-time themes such as wartime medicine, psychology, family and politics, it also has a fair treatment of wartime military technologies such as use of modern Drones in warfare, and does present use of the TEA language in developing or prototyping software programs for driving, guiding and leveraging drones in AI-oriented warfare and reconnaissance missions. This book, though still generally less known, has been recieved at the National Library of Uganda, and can be referenced as such:


Joseph Willrich Lutalo. Rock ‘N’ Draw. I*POW, 2025. ISBN
978-9913-624-71-8 (First Edition). A physical copy might be accessed via the
National Library of Uganda (NLU), but also, an education-purposes-only
edition is accessible freely via Academia at https://t.me/ipowriters/237.


The work on Occult Science, Esotericism and particularly "Computational Mysticism", that was written by the inventor of the TEA language, and which work is in a treatise known as "Novus Modernus Grimoire Lumtauto", does present several interesting use-cases leveraging the TEA language in scenarios such as computing codes known as "magical sources" which can be derived from intentions, prayers or messages via statistical analysis and sequence transformations, and which can then be leveraged to design magical payloads such as sigils, mantras, talismans and more, is covered in the following work:


Joseph Willrich Lutalo. NOVUS MODERNUS GRIMOIRE
LUMTAUTO MAGIA. I*POW, November 2025. A Modern Grimoire of
5 Eternal Magickal Languages. Available via:
https://www.academia.edu/resource/work/145086513. 


Finally, that work concerning the idea of leveraging TEA to implement a sample/proof-of-concept operating system known as the "TEA Operating System", "TOS" or just "TEAOS" is based on a design of the system that is captured in a use-case design recently published via Zenodo at:


Joseph Willrich Lutalo. TEA Operating System : Use-Case Design
Diagram, April 2026. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.19592521.
